[music]
[music] Pushkin.
There are some sure signs that the
holidays have arrived. The lights go up
on Main Street of the town where I live.
People pull their coats a little tighter
around them as they go from shop to
shop. and my colleague Benadaf Hafrey
shows up to tell me some absolutely
crazy story about Christmas.
>> It was the night before Christmas.
>> Oh my god.
>> And all through the house. Not a
creature was stirring.
>> Not even a mouse.
>> That's right.
>> This of course is a visit from St.
Nicholas, more commonly known as the
Night Before Christmas. a poem that Ben
has, let's just say, learned a little
too much about over the past few months.
>> Have you read the Stuart Little version
of this where um to save Stuart's
feelings, the Littles uh rewrite it as
not even a louse [laughter] because
there's they don't want it. It's too
demeaning to mice.
This poem's everywhere. It's in Stuart
Little. It's in Die Hards read this
poem. The stockings were hung by the
chimney with care in hopes that St.
Nicholas soon would be there. The
children were nestled all snug in their
beds while visions of sugar plums danced
in their heads. My mom and her kirchief
and I in my cap had just settled our
brains. Very weird choice of words
there.
>> Yeah.
>> For a long winter's nap.
>> This went on for a while.
>> And quick. I knew in a moment it must be
>> St. Nick. [laughter]
>> This is this is the poem that creates it
fully launches the modern Santa Claus.
It's his It's the first time the
reindeers are named.
>> It's the first time he gets eight and
not one.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's it's it is the blueprint for
American Christmas. Very everyone thinks
Christmas is this ancient thing. There's
no evidence that Jesus Christ was born
on December 25th. The whole thing is
this invented tradition. [music] And it
is it is this poem that gives us the
modern American Christmas written by
Clement Clark Moore in 1822, published
in upstate New York in the Troy Sentinel
in 1823.
>> Until you mentioned this to me, hadn't
fully understood how um extraordinary
this accomplishment of this poem is. I
don't even like Christmas. I could get
>> So, we've established this in prior
versions of our Christmas episode,
>> but I can get halfway through that from
memory. I suspect that an insanely high
percentage of Americans can [music] get
a significant way into this poem from
memory.
>> I would stake my life on the fact that
more people this is the only poem that
most people know.
>> Totally agree. Totally. I and I would I
was going to say that that an incredibly
high percentage of people of Americans
not only know this poem from memory but
know no other poems at this length from
memory.
>> Absolutely.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, but the first thing people
would have read of The Night Before
Christmas is not even the poem. In fact,
it begins, it is introduced by an
editor's note that starts with the line,
"We know not to whom we are indebted for
the following description of that
unweary patron of children, dot dot dot,
Santa Claus."
>> Yeah.
>> Uh it it starts by acknowledging that
they don't know who wrote it.
>> Yeah. So, it begin it begins with an
authorship mystery and the authorship
mystery persists.
>> Yes. though I propose to end it here
today.
>> Yeah. [music]
[bell]
>> You're listening to Revisionist History,
my podcast about things overlooked and
misunderstood. I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
Today we bring you our annual holiday
spectacular, which this year is not
about sugar plums, but about a historic
theft, a literary crime that begins with
a bold accusation.
For nearly 200 years, have we attributed
this immensely famous poem to the wrong
person?
[music] My colleague Ben Daf Haffrey has
a story.
Oh, one last thing. If you're listening
with young children familiar with Santa
Claus, this episode might challenge
their sense of reality.
Proceed with caution.
Sometime in the late 1990s, a woman
named Mary Van Dusen logged onto the
internet. She was looking up her great
great great great grandfather, Major
Henry Livingston Jr., that's right,
seven generations back and while
browsing the worldwide web, she came
across a piece of information that
changed the course of her life.
>> One of the pages that came up was just a
very short little page, but it said two
things. It said that Henry Livingston
was a possible author of Night Before
Christmas and it said that he had named
his reindeer for the horses in his
stable. Who would believe it?
>> Henry Livingston Jr. was a gentleman
farmer and poet from a prominent early
American family. He was reputed to be a
great lover of Christmas and crucially
for our purposes today, not Clement
Clark Moore, the [music] person who had
claimed authorship of the poem not long
after its publication and who for almost
two centuries the general public has
believed wrote it. So to Mary and others
in her family, it seemed he was also the
victim of a historic injustice. [music]
Just a couple decades after a visit from
St. Nicholas the poem was published. His
granddaughter came across a best-selling
holiday edition and saw the author's
name clearly printed, Clement Clark
Moore. [music] At which point she
brought it in a hurry to her mother,
Henry's daughter-in-law, who said,
"Someone has made a mistake. [music]
Clement Moore did not write the night
before Christmas. Your grandfather Henry
Livingston wrote it. [music]
>> They saw a wrong that needed to be
writed."
>> So then you start looking into this
>> right
>> now. Now, Henry had never claimed
authorship himself. [music] But he died
in 1828, so no one could ask him about
it, but the family remembered it as
Henry's poem, and [music] they took it
upon themselves to do the research to
prove it to the world. And so began the
great Livingston quest. This is Montigu
and Capulet's [music] Hatfields and
McCoys Christmas edition.
[music]
The first person that took it up were
the children of um Catherine, my fourth
great grandmother. So I was always
pleased about that.
>> At the beginning, all the family had was
recollection.
Relatives who said that Henry Livingston
Jr. had read the poem aloud to them when
they were kids, but they needed to
establish a record. The gold standard
would be a copy of the poem written in
Henry's hand. They decided they would
collect as many pieces of paper as they
could. And this is really a godsend
because they were able to contact two of
Henry's children before they died.
>> They heard that someone had gotten a
copy of the poem that had Henry's
handwriting on it.
>> And do we have that today or
>> No, we don't because they're living on
the frontier and the original burned in
one of the house fires.
>> But the Livingston didn't quit. When we
talked, Mary walked me through the
generations of people who've taken up
the quest since.
>> The next search for
proof of Henry's po uh authorship is
from Henry Livingston of Babylon, Long
Island.
>> I began to understand that this search
was a kind of living stonian right of
passage,
>> something handed from generation to
generation like a precious gemstone or
like a feudal title. the original
>> a matter of destiny.
>> Having your name in your birth
announcement as having to research night
before Christmas puts a burden on your
shoulders that is very heavy.
>> After all, this is an eminent family.
The genealogical tree Mary has put
together includes George HW Bush, W and
Jeb, as well as a congressman and a
mayor of New York. Eleanor Roosevelt was
also in the mix somehow. But alongside
the campaigns and inaugurations, there
was a single golden thread, the
authorship question. And I think part of
that fixation must have had to do with
what poetry meant at the time. Malcolm
and I talked about that over a glass of
eggnog at the annual revisionist history
holiday party.
>> One of the things that interests me, it
is a po a poem created in a very
specific moment in time, the early 19th
century,
>> right? And because poetry plays a role
in public life in back then in a way
that it doesn't now,
>> right? Well, so newspapers are the mass
mass the mass medium, right? There's not
television, radio, recorded sound that
doesn't exist. So you have poems all
over the place in newspapers and they
are there they are of they can be
satirical, they can be funny. There are
these very concise, pathy ways of
expressing popular sentiments and
[music] the ones that are really
>> Can I give you a good example?
>> Yeah, please.
>> My mom grew up in Jamaica during the
Second World War has all these hilarious
poems written about the Second World War
from a Jamaican perspective. My
favorite, this one might be an might be
a an English one. You know, there all
these Americans come over and are
stationed in England before the invay.
So she would as a kid my mom would
recite this once. The gum chewing yank
and the cud chewing cow. Very alike but
different somehow. Uh what is the
difference? Ah I've got it now. The
intelligent look on the face of the cow.
>> That's so good. [laughter]
But no, it's to the point, right, that
the a lot of these what what what the
English are trying to navigate is the
indignity of this huge country of what
people they consider to be their
inferiors, uncultured, right, right?
Coming and saving their bacon, right?
It's it's humiliating. And how do they
make sense of that humiliation? Through
these poems. poems are doing all this
work.
>> Very much like a almost like a meme
today where it's like you see a thing
and you're like that gets it that
somehow ineffitably [music] puts its
finger right on the pulse.
>> Yeah.
>> And the pulse this poem had its finger
on was that there was a crisis of
Christmas at the very moment of its
publication.
>> Before the visitance from St. Nick,
Christmas was celebrated in a very
different way. Steven Nissenbomb, author
of the Puliter Prize shortlisted the
battle for Christmas. In his book, he
argues that Christmas was always about
these social inversions. So lowerass
people would live like kings for a day.
The best food, the best ale, presents,
provided they were peasants from then
on. But those traditions were better
suited to grand old country estates
where everyone knew each other and kind
of accepted where they fit in the
pecking order. That was not the case in
modern American democratic cities. It
was commonly celebrated as what I would
call something of a cross between
Halloween and New Year's Eve because of
what amounts to trickor treat. Bands of
young men, most of them poor from the
working classes, uh went roving around
town. They'd stop at the more prosperous
homes where they'd ask for food and
alcohol. But if they didn't get what
they wanted, they would ostentatiously
withhold that goodwill
or they might even threaten to do some
small damage.
>> Christmas was getting out of control and
so a group of elite New Yorkers took the
matter in hand. We're talking about a
small group of people who call
themselves knicker after the Dutch uh
origins of the city, but this was a kind
of identity that they tried on to create
again a a sense of the good old days of
New York uh when the classes did get
along and the the meshing worked very
well.
>> The Nickerbachers were a conservative
organization trying to invent new
American traditions and also great names
for basketball teams. Go Nicks. And they
found a figurehead for their new version
of Christmas in St. Nicholas of Myra,
patron saint of merchants, bakers,
brides, the falsely accused, and
children. In the 1820s, the lines
between St. Nicholas and the sort of
scary figure of Santa Claus, a
mythological giftgiver, began to blur.
But how were the Nickerbachers going to
unleash this new invention upon the
huddled masses? The answer came in 1823
with the poem we've been talking about
in this episode. 542 words about a guy
named St. Nicholas terrifying a
wellto-do father by showing up in the
middle of the night and instead of
demanding the best grog in the house,
leaving a bunch of presents. Exactly the
kind of poem Clement Clark Moore, an
eminent New Yorker and friend of the
Nickerbachers, would write at precisely
that moment. Moore was a Bible scholar.
He lived on an estate in Manhattan
called Chelsea, which later did in fact
become the neighborhood of Chelsea.
>> The new Christmas that Clement Clark
Moore was promulgating
continued in a very innocent way. The
old social inversion, but in this case,
it wasn't the rich changing places with
the poor. It was the grown-ups changing
places with the kids. So the children
have really replaced uh the working
class uh in the new Christmas.
>> This was a version of Christmas that
worked and it just got bigger. Clement
Moore's estate shrank, but his legend
and the legend of his poem grew until
the Livingston caught wind of it.
The problem was that despite all their
efforts, no Livingston had been able to
turn up any conclusive historical or
documentary evidence proving beyond a
reasonable doubt that Henry Livingston
Jr. had written the poem. But what if
there was another approach?
An ancestor of Mary Van Dusen's hit upon
this idea in a letter from the 1920s.
She had been interviewed for an article
in the Christian Science Monitor on the
authorship question. one of the first
times this claim that Henry Livingston
Jr. had written the poem went national.
This, it turned out, was kind of a
jarring experience for her. [music] So,
she wrote to her cousin William, who'
set the whole thing up. Quote, "I am
writing from my bed. I could not sleep
last night and thinking over our
conversation. I got drawn into this
cross-examination, which was quite
inquisitorial in its nature, for the
problematical authorship of that poem.
It is a very delicate question to handle
and I am not at all in favor of a writer
for a Christian science paper handling
it. It ought to be touched on very
delicately and by some man of eminent
literary attainments. Wait till you find
the fit man to do it. We relatives would
only have dirt thrown at us by press and
people for semore is a demigod almost in
their eyes. Almost a century has this
fetish been adored and I will not have
myself or my family [music] mixed up in
it. It is too delicate a subject to be
dragged and rad about except with great
tact and reverence. Wait till you get
someone of high literary merit to write
about the authorship. Do not make this
any but a first class writer. End quote.
Without documentary proof, the
Livingston needed to make a stylistic
argument that this poem sounded like
Livingston and not like Moore. and only
someone [music] of eminent literary
attainments could really land it. The
Livingston would wait nearly 80 years
until Mary Van Dusen came across that
website, took up the family quest and
found such a scholar. [music] At last,
>> I figured I needed a poetry expert. So,
I went to the internet [music]
and I looked at a archive poetry.
[music] I saw Ian Lancer
as the expert of the website and sent
him email and I said, "I have this
problem. What do I do?" And he said,
"You find Don." [music]
When we're back, Dawn, the man of
eminent literary attainments and the
very best thing the Livingston could
ever hope to find in their stockings.
[music]
It's the week before Thanksgiving, the
year 2000. A group of people file into a
bookstore in Washington DC to have their
very sense of reality challenged. The
event aired on C-SPAN.
>> Thanks. It's great to be with you this
evening.
>> This is Don Foster. At the time, he was
an English professor at Vasser. He's
straight out of central casting. Blazer,
khakis, tie, handsome in a dead poet
society kind of way. When he makes a
particularly devilish point, he shrugs
his shoulders almost imperceptibly as
his eyes wander to the corner of his
great big glasses, as if to say, "Do I
dare to eat a peach? Do I dare disturb
the universe? I do." My office is what
you would expect an English professor's
office to be, piled high with student
papers and with writings I have studied
by poets and playwrights, some still
unknown.
But intermixed with the literary texts
are others by felon zealots or nameless
resentics whose identity or actions were
of sufficient interest for someone to
ask who wrote this thing. Professor
Foster made his name arguing that an
anonymously published poem called a
funeral eley was actually written by
William Shakespeare. He'd used modern
computer analysis to argue it so
forcefully that anthologies were updated
and the press took note. Foster's phone
began to ring.
>> Professor, do you know that you're going
to be on the front page of the New York
Times tomorrow? And I said, "Well, no,
Professor."
>> A star was born. Foster practiced a kind
of forensics called literary
attribution. The premise was that each
of us has a style, a kind of fingerprint
in the way we write that if revealed
would prove conclusively that we wrote
something. Dusting for that fingerprint
relied on two key methodologies. First,
computer analysis where statistical
[music]
patterns could be detected in an
author's work, kind of like large
language models. Now, second, an
investigator would marshall their own
powers of close reading. [music] For
instance, just weeks after the
Shakespeare story blew up, Foster was
asked to identify the anonymous author
of a dishy novel called Primary Colors,
a thinly veiled account of the Clinton
campaign. Foster had a list of suspects.
He fed samples of their writing into his
computer [music] and began to look
closely at how the book was written. The
anonymous writer showed a preference for
adverbs [music] with ly endings like
vaguely. He used dashes to make compound
words like [music] triple back over
somersault and pander piouette. He liked
zany adjectives. His pros thought Foster
revealed certain racial ideas. And all
those [music] signs pointed clearly to
the journalist Joe Klene. Foster nailed
it. Klein eventually fessed up and this
was when things started to get weird for
the professor.
>> And at that point uh uh prosecutors and
defenders and police and other
investigators saw in my work application
that I had not really thought of myself.
um question documents in criminal cases
and and uh other uh kinds of anonymous
liable harassments uh were suddenly um
being sent to me and saying can you
figure out who wrote this? Soon Foster
was teaching by day and by night,
working the Uni Bomber case, the John
Bené Ramsay case, the anthrax case, and
few major news items of the late 1990s
were beyond the literary forensics of
Don Foster report that Monica Lewinsky
wrote the three-page document. So, uh, I
now go back and ask the question, did
she really? The crowd in the bookstore
is wrapped around his finger, and that's
when he starts talking about Mary Van
Dusen, the great great great great
granddaughter of Major Henry Livingston
Jr.
>> I got a phone call in August of 1999
from a woman who said that she thought
that her ancestor wrote The Night Before
Christmas, not Clement Clark Moore.
>> Mary and Don teamed up. She traveled the
country searching for proof. every
version of The Night Before Christmas
that was ever written. She made a corpus
of Henry's work. She got a microfilm
machine for her house, for her house,
and read every single newspaper she
could find from 1775 to 1830 in order to
establish a documentary record. She put
it all on a website, which ran
ultimately to over 15,000 pages by her
count in hopes that Dawn could do his
detective work and find an answer. And
he did. He began to look into questions
of style just like he did with primary
colors. [music] What sort of adjectives
were used? What kind of adverbs? What
sort of attitudes were expressed? He
compared A visit from St. Nicholas to
other poems by Moore and Livingston.
Hundreds of thousands of words have been
written on this subject [music] and we
all have holidays to get to. So I'm
going to be selective about what we talk
about here. But a good example of the
case he made is the question of
anopestic deter.
An extremely tedious matter that of
course is the only thing Malcolm wanted
to talk about when I saw him.
>> I want to be in the graduate seminar
with you where this poem is taken
seriously.
>> Okay, let's let let's uh let's break
down the the formal qualities of this
poem. First, there's the meter which is
sort of the crucial thing here. This
poem is in a extremely popular meter
used for light verse and satire called
anopestic tetrometer. So,
>> so give it rhythmically give me lines
that show
>> it was the night before Christmas when
all through the house not a creature was
stirring not even a mouse dump.
>> And you as a parent might be familiar
with this from like all of Dr. Seuss.
like Horton here's a who on the 15th of
May in the jungle of New in the heat of
the day in the cool of the pool he was
splashing and you know this kind of like
it trips off the tongue an anopest is a
line it's two unstressed syllables and a
stressed one so it's da da da da dum
that's like a da da dum that's an
anopest detramer tetra from the Latin
for four it means there's four of those
per line of anopestic detrammeter it's
such an infectious meter it's easier to
memorize and so it it can transmit
through word of mouth much more easily,
which is what happens with this this
poem as well. Um, in fact, it is it's
it's so good for the spoken word that
the way many people probably know it uh
today other than TW the night before
Christmas is the way I am by Eminem
>> was the night before Christmas and all
through the house. [laughter]
You see, it's like
>> it's it it just like it hooks you in.
>> Yeah.
>> So, Foster alleged that Moore was way
too serious to be a big anopestic toer
guy. He says that Moore condemned the
quote depraved taste in poetry of those
who read anestic satire. End quote. In
essence, Livingston was way more likely
to write in anapest than Moore, not
least of all because he was just a
really fun guy.
>> Uh here's a little sample of Henry
Livingston's um verse. This is the way
he closes one of his many uh Christmas
and New Year's poems. But it's time that
I bid you goodbye till next year by
wishing you happiness, peace, and good
cheer. Uh and he has kind of poem after
poem after poem uh in this vein. Many of
them Christmas or New Year's poems.
>> Then he turns his attention to Clement
Clark Moore.
>> Uh Clement Clark Moore I thought was
pretty Santa Claus kind of guy too. But
as it turns out, this is part of the
lore that's arisen after his name was
associated with the poem. It was quite
the kermagin. One might even say
Scrooge, one might even say Grinch. Uh
uh he writes things like humble the
praise and trifling the regard whichever
weight upon the moral bard. And then he
goes on to scold women for wearing
cosmetics or to um chastise children for
being too noisy. Uh quite a severe man.
>> So according to Foster, on the one hand,
we have a good cheer to the ladies kind
of guy. And then there's the Grinch
Scrooge. You could say maybe more didn't
stand a chance just based on this
character assassination, but there was
more. In his book, Foster compared the
two men further. Henry Livingston Jr.
fought for independence. Clement Moore
was allegedly a slave owner. Livingston
was a quote friend of the Indians.
Moore, descended from the guy who talked
the Mohawks into selling Long Island.
And stylistically, even setting aside
the slam dunk of the anopestic to
trimeter, the poem was Livingston all
over the use of the adverbial all, as in
the children were nestled all snug in
their beds. And then some funny business
with the reindeer names. It all looked
very, very suspicious. Don Foster, the
man of eminent literary attainments, had
apparently solved the mystery at long
last. The press went wild.
Finally tonight, the mystery of a visit
from St. Nicholas. It has been a holiday
tradition since 1822. But who really
wrote the famous poem?
>> He was in the New York Times twice. It
was on network television.
>> Don Foster is sort of a literary sleuth.
He was the one who discovered journalist
Joe Klene was the anonymous author of
the bestseller Primary Colors. He
studies the author's words and styles.
And in this case, he says Henry
Livingston's literary fingerprints are
all over the night before Christmas.
>> Don Foster's argument spread. The city
of Troy, whose newspaper famously first
published the poem, hosted as a kind of
Christmas media event, a mock trial in a
real courtroom, presided over by a
former New York Supreme Court judge, and
argued by actual lawyers on the question
of who wrote the poem.
>> Has the jury reached a verdict? The jury
naturally decided that the author of Was
the Night Before Christmas is Henry
Blison Jr.
[applause]
[cheering]
>> This prompted the mayor of Troy to issue
a proclamation, quote, that December
23rd, 2014 is Henry Livingston Jr. Day
in Troy, New York. Famous musicians have
reportedly announced on stage that Henry
Livingston Jr. is the real author of the
poem. The Freaking Poetry Foundation
website has a page for Henry Livingston
Jr. crediting him as the author of the
poem unambiguously.
This is not ubiquitous, but through Don
Foster, [music] Mary Van Dusen and the
Livingstons had achieved something her
ancestors could only ever have dreamed
of. And even if people stopped short of
denying Moore's [music] authorship,
everywhere people began to question it.
After nearly two centuries of injustice,
[music] the Livingston family quest was
paying off.
>> I had uh myself come around to the view
and uh that this old family legend was
right. Um in fact uh has I think finally
been vindicated and the Bible professors
um claim to this poem I think is not
just highly suspect but um waiting to
see what the opposition might have to
say.
Oh, but the opposition was watching and
they didn't like [music] what they saw.
A couple months ago, I visited Seth Ker,
a fame dealer of historic documents in
White Plains, New York. Statues of
Abraham Lincoln were strewn about the
office. Advanced copies of Martin Luther
King's I have a dream speech, an
original prints of the Constitution,
hung on the wall. The Constitution, I
have a dream. It was the night before
Christmas.
>> At the time the controversy um erupted
because of Don Foster's book, I owned
what was thought to be the only copy in
private hands written by Clemency Moore.
>> Ker became embroiled in the authorship
question. And so a New York Times
reporter called me and asked me about
it. And you know, I said, "I didn't
know. Let me look into it." And I was
totally open-minded. I mean, if I had
been convinced, I would have changed my
description of it and or mentioned the
controversy. But the more I got into it,
you know, the more upset I got by the by
the uh dishonesty of the arguments made
against Clement Moore. Um, so I kept
going even even after I thought this is
sufficient to, you know, make the case.
>> You did send me quite a long document in
in preparation for this conversation.
>> Yeah. And I could have sent you a lot
more.
>> Ker began to go through the claims in
Don Foster's book and he soon found that
most of them were deeply suspicious.
>> The comparable phraseology that table
confused me. Would you would you explain
the origin of that table?
>> Yes.
>> Let me find it.
Caller got out a binder stuffed with
papers. Nobody is taking this matter
lightly. In fact, we spent an entire
afternoon going through this, but let's
stick to the big ticket items today.
First, style. Moore wouldn't write like
this. But Caller showed me a chart
comparing parts of the poem with other
poems Moore had written.
>> Here's another from another one of his
writings. was an autoutminal mourn
celestial bright
the all snug and from something else he
snug and tidy night before Christmas he
talks about visions of sugar plums
danced in their heads one of the rhymes
in night before Christmas is a clatter
and matter and in another poem and
spatter words feelings thoughts phrases
these would all be evidence that Moore
could have written the night before
Christmas and in fact did write the
night before Christmas as opposed to,
you know, just making the arguments that
he couldn't have because he didn't use
these these words.
>> So maybe Livingston as author can't be
proven stylistically. But that's not all
he and his colleagues found. The
historical argument about when Henry
would have needed to write the poem in
order to be the author didn't line up
either.
>> But the fact that all the stories that
the Livingston family have told can be
actually disproven.
you know, oh, was taken by a nanny and
then you prove that, well, the nanny
wasn't there for another eight years.
>> Also suspect, Foster's finding that
Moore was a humorless Scrooge, which was
often a clear case of taking something
more Moore had written out of context.
What I found wasn't
just that it was misinterpreted,
but that
it was elited to the point where if you
just read the full sentence, it actually
proves the opposite of what is being
used to um argue.
>> Now, I can't know the mind of Don
Foster, but there were at least a few
examples of his attributions not exactly
panning out. A couple years after his
book, Author Unknown, came out, he
retracted his famous claim that
Shakespeare had written the funeraly
under mounting skepticism. And after he
wrote an article seeming to suggest an
innocent government scientist was
responsible for sending the anthrax
letters after September 11th, he was
sued for liel, settled for some
undisclosed amount of money, and went
back to being predominantly a Vassor
English professor. I had hoped to
interview him for this story, but he
declined to speak with me through a
colleague. He'll keep Christmas in his
way, and I'll keep it in mine. But in my
view, Foster's argument has done a grave
injustice to Clement Clark Moore that
we, the staff of revisionist History and
Associates in the rare documents trade
refused to leave unchallenged.
>> And his book, Arthur Unknown, is still
referred to and still used by, you know,
people who are looking into it. And then
so many other reporters
go with it as the the story of he said
she said that I don't blame the family
as much as I blame some of the scholars
who should know better. But um it does
it does still bother me like if I bring
up or last time I did was years ago
bring up the idea of a museum exhibit
and Clement Moore's authorship. Some uh
accept it outright but others have been
well we have to be careful. we have to
talk about the controversy. Like, no,
you you know, you you have to
acknowledge that there was one, but you
should not pretend that it's actually
real.
Christmas is all about your dreams
coming true. Maybe Foster tried to do
that for Mary, but to my mind, in the
end, I think what they set in motion was
a satisfying end to the mystery. It just
wasn't the conclusion they'd hoped for.
It's fine with me that you come to a
different position than I do. I don't
ever say flatly
that Henry wrote the poem. I say I
believe that Henry wrote the poem and
here's the data and make up your own
mind.
So if you use it to come to a different
conclusion than I do, that's fine.
At least you examine the issue
and you feel peace in yourself at the
answer you come to.
Ben, was there was there one bit of
evidence that for you really sealed the
case?
>> Yeah. Um, this whole argument against
Clement Clark Moore relies on the idea
that he's a Scrooge who would never
write about Christmas. He would never
never write Lightverse, never write
about fairies, certainly never write
about Santa Claus and Christmas. And and
these researchers found not just one but
two effectively Christmas poems by
Clement Clark Moore that predate or are
in tight sequence with A Visit from St.
Nicholas. So the first is a letter
called from St. Nicholas which is
literally in the voice of Santa Claus to
Clement Clark Moore's kid which I guess
true to his haters is about why she's
not getting any presents that year
though it is very sweet and crucially
it's an anestic determinator but this
one is the one that I actually really
love. Um the Melville scholar Scott
Norworthy thinks that this poem and A
visit from St. Nicholas were written at
the same time. There was a snowstorm in
New York on December 21st was a Saturday
in 1822. I wrote this poem called Lines
written after a snowstorm.
Yeah, I'll read it to you. Come children
dear and look around. Behold how soft
and light [music] the silent snow has
clad the ground in robes of purest
white. The trees seem decked by fairy
hand, nor need their native green. And
every breeze appears to stand all hushed
to view [music] the seam. You wonder how
the snows were made that dance upon the
air, as if from purer worlds they
[music] strayed so lightly and so fair.
Perhaps they are the summer flowers and
northern [music] stars that bloom,
wafted away from icy bowers to cheer our
winter's gloom. Perhaps they're feathers
[music] of a race of birds that live
away in some cold, dreary, wintry place
far from [music] the sun's warm ray. And
clouds perhaps are downy beds on which
the winds repose, who when they rouse
their slumbering heads, shake down the
feathery snows. But see, my darlings,
while we stay and gaze with fond
delight, the fairy scene soon fades away
and mocks our raptured sight. And let
this fleeting vision teach truth you
soon must know that all the joys we hear
can reach are transient as the snow.
>> That says something.
Christmas is a madeup holiday. The core
of it is these weird social inversions
that last for a day and then melt like
the new fallen snow. In that sense, I
think it's easy to see why the story
that Henry Livingston Jr. actually wrote
this poem gets retold so often. It's
another Christmy inversion. One about as
old as modern Christmas itself. Just
another story about a thing that's not
as it seems. Fat men in velvet robes
sliding down thin chimneys. Everything
you ever wanted under a tree that's
indoors [music] and your great great
great great
grandfather's forgotten role in
inventing Christmas.
I don't believe it. But then again, t
the season.
[music]
Revisionist History is [music] produced
by me, Ben Natiffrey, with Nina Bird
Lawrence and Lucy Sullivan. Our editor
[music] is Karen Shakuri. Factchecking
by Anukica Robbins. Our executive
producer [music] is Jacob Smith.
Production support from Luke Lamond.
Engineering by David Herman at [music]
Good Studios and Nina Bird Lawrence.
Original music was composed, arranged,
and recorded [music] by Luis Gara.
Mixing and mastering by Marcelo
Dolivera. I have stood [music] on the
shoulders of giants for this absurd
episode. All credit to the scholars and
writers who [music] made this possible.
Scott Norworthy of the Melana blog, Tom
German, and Justin [music] Fox. to our
friends in Troy, the incomparable Duncan
Crra, [music] and city historian Kathy
Sheien. If I've left you unconvinced
about Moore's authorship, you can
[music] read the latest salvo from the
Living Stonians in the book, Who Wrote
the Night Before Christmas? by Professor
Macdonald P. Jackson. Just be sure to
read [music] Scott Norseworthy's
response to it on the Melvilleiana blog
right afterwards.
From [music] revisionist History, happy
holidays and we'll see you all in the
new year. [music]
>> [music]